Output of the discard keys design team (#2673)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-tls.md

Additional functions might be needed to configure TLS.

### Handshake Complete {#handshake-complete}

In this document, the TLS handshake is considered complete when the TLS stack
has reported that the handshake is complete.  This happens when the TLS stack
has both sent a Finished message and verified the peer's Finished message.

> Verifying the peer's Finished provides endpoints with an assurance that

Author: Fixed

previous handshake messages have not been modified.  Note that the handshake

> does not complete on both endpoints simultaneously, therefore any requirements

Author: Fixed

> placed on endpoints based on the completion of the handshake are specific to

Author: Fixed

the handshake being complete from the perspective of the endpoint in question.

### Handshake Confirmed {#handshake-confirmed}

> In this document, the TLS handshake is considered confirmed when both of the

Author: Fixed

> following two conditions are met: the handshake is complete and the endpoint

Author: Fixed

> has received an ACK for a packet sent with 1-RTT keys.  This second condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has received an acknowledgment for a packet sent with 1-RTT keys.  This second condition
```

Author: Fixed

This second condition can be implemented by recording the lowest packet number

> sent with 1-RTT keys, and the highest value of the Largest Acknowledged field

Author: Resolving as editorial, this change can be made by the editors after this PR lands.

> in any received 1-RTT ACK frame: once the latter is higher than or equal to the

Author: Resolving as editorial, this change can be made by the editors after this PR lands.

handshake is confirmed.

> 

Reviewer 2: Why is this not "Once the largest acknowledged is higher than or **equal** to the smallest 1-RTT packet number sent?

Author: Good catch, fixed

> former, the handshake is confirmed.

Author: I think I prefer the current wording. I'm afraid the suggestion could be confusing a reader that starts searching for the definition of a "recorded packet number".

> former, the handshake is confirmed.

Reviewer 3: I would at least suggest using "recording" instead of "tracking". It's a single event, not a continuous tracking.

> former, the handshake is confirmed.

Author: Fixed

After QUIC moves to a new encryption level, packet protection keys for previous

> encryption levels can be discarded.  This occurs several times during the

Reviewer: Right now, this removed statement is still true, so I think we should retain it.

Author: This statement existed because previously there was an "all the keys except initial" section and an "initial keys" section. Now each flavor of keys has its own section so pointing out initial specifically here seems odd.

Reviewer: I see.  That being the case, it might pay to reference all of the relevant sections here.  The statement here doesn't really reference the text that it depends on, except for key update.

Author: This text is in section 4.9, and the relevant sections are 4.9.1, 4.9.2 and 4.9.3 so the reader can see them coming over the horizon. Or do you mean other sections?

and ignoring any outstanding Initial packets.

### Discarding Handshake Keys

An endpoint MUST NOT discard its handshake keys until the TLS handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}).  An endpoint SHOULD discard its handshake

> keys as soon as it has confirmed the handshake.  Most applications protocols

Author: Fixed

> will send data after the handshake, generating acknowledgements and ensuring

Author: Good point, fixed.

> that both endpoints can discard their handshake keys promptly.  Endpoints that

Author: Fixed

> do not have reason to send immediately after completing the handshake MAY send

Author: The subject of this sentence is endpoints, not applications. Also, MAY is a RFC 2119 keyword, which does not suggest permission. I think the current text gives implementations an option.

> MAY   This word, or the adjective "OPTIONAL", mean that an item is
   truly optional.  One vendor may choose to include the item because a
   particular marketplace requires it or because the vendor feels that
   it enhances the product while another vendor may omit the same item.
   An implementation which does not include a particular option MUST be
   prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does
   include the option, though perhaps with reduced functionality. In the
   same vein an implementation which does include a particular option
   MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which
   does not include the option (except, of course, for the feature the
   option provides.)

ack-eliciting frames, such as PING, which will cause the handshake to be
confirmed when they are acknowledged.

> 

Reviewer 2: Why not make this a MUST, or at least SHOULD, such that a hanshake timeout can close much earlier than Idle timeout?

Reviewer: There's no real reason to discard those keys, so it's enough to rely on other incentives.

Author: I agree with @martinthomson, discarding handshake keys is not a security requirement. And in practice if an application protocol never sends ACK-soliciting frames it's probably not very useful...

### Discarding 0-RTT Keys

> Clients SHOULD discard 0-RTT keys as soon as they install 1-RTT keys, since

Author: Fixed

> they have no use after that moment.

Author: Fixed by reordering statements in this section

> Clients do not send 0-RTT packets after sending a 1-RTT

Author: The idea here was to state a fact, with a reference to the normative text. I thought that was preferable to repeating the normative text.

send 0-RTT packets after sending a 1-RTT packet ({{using-early-data}}).
Therefore a server MAY discard 0-RTT keys as soon as it receives a 1-RTT
packet.  However, due to packet reordering, a 0-RTT packet could arrive after
a 1-RTT packet.  Servers MAY temporarily retain 0-RTT keys to allow decrypting
reordered packets without requiring their contents to be retransmitted with

> 1-RTT keys.  Servers MUST discard 0-RTT keys within three times the Probe

Author: Fixed

> Timeout (PTO, see {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}) after receiving a 1-RTT packet.  A server

Author: Fixed

determines that it has received all 0-RTT packets, which can be done by
keeping track of packet numbers.

> 

Reviewer 2: This is a bit hard to understand if you are not aware that 1-RTT and 0-RTT have the same packet number space, so perhaps make a note of that.

Author: Good point, added that.

> packets, which can be done by keeping track of packet numbers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
packets, which can be done by keeping track of missing packet numbers.
```

> packets, which can be done by keeping track of packet numbers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
packets, which can be done by keeping track of missing packet numbers.
```

The easiest proxy for this is whether there are multiple ACK ranges in the ACK frame, which a receiver is already tracking, FWIW.

Author: Fixed

and ignoring any outstanding Initial packets.

### Discarding Handshake Keys

An endpoint MUST NOT discard its handshake keys until the TLS handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}).  An endpoint SHOULD discard its handshake
keys as soon as it has confirmed the handshake.  Most applications protocols
will send data after the handshake, ensuring the peer can discard their
handshake keys promptly.  Applications protocols that do not MAY send
ACK-eliciting frames encrypted with 1-RTT keys as soon as they have installed

> those send keys and until they receive an acknowledgment for one of them,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those send keys and until they receive an acknowledgment,
```

Author: Fixed

> ensuring the peer can discard their handshake keys.

Reviewer: Sending data is a prerequisite for getting an ACK, which is a selfish thing.  You send (ACK-eliciting) data so that you get an ACK and so that you can discard handshake keys.

So this statement is incorrect as formulated.  Maybe instead:

> Endpoints that do not have reason to send immediately after completing the handshake can send ack-eliciting frames, such as PING, which will cause the handshake to be confirmed when they are acknowledged.

Author: Fixed

### Discarding 0-RTT Keys

Clients SHOULD discard 0-RTT keys as soon as they install 1-RTT keys, since
they have no use after that moment.

Clients do not send 0-RTT packets after sending a 1-RTT
packet ({{using-early-data}}).  Therefore a server MAY discard 0-RTT keys as
soon as it receives a 1-RTT packet.  However, due to packet reordering, a

> client's valid 0-RTT packet could arrive after a 1-RTT packet.  Servers MAY

Reviewer: ```suggestion
0-RTT packet could arrive after a 1-RTT packet.  Servers MAY
```

"client's" and "valid" are implied.  Fix the a/an thing separately.

Author: Fixed

temporarily retain 0-RTT keys to allow decrypting reordered packets without
requiring their contents to be retransmitted with 1-RTT keys.  There is a bound

> on how long these keys can be temporarily retained: servers MUST have discarded

Reviewer: Drop the lead-in.  "Servers MUST discard 0-RTT within three times the Probe Timeout (...) of receiving a 1-RTT packet."

Author: Fixed

0-RTT keys once three times the Probe Timeout (PTO, see {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}) has
elapsed after receiving a 1-RTT packet.  Servers MAY also keep track of
received 0-RTT packet numbers as an indication that all of them have been

> received which allows them to discard 0-RTT keys earlier.

Reviewer: It might be easier to say "A server can drop 0-RTT keys earlier if it determines that it has received all 0-RTT packets, which can be done by tracking packet numbers."

Author: Fixed

to decrypt 1-RTT packets from the server, whereas a server will be able to
decrypt 1-RTT packets from the client.

Even though 1-RTT keys are available to a server after receiving the first
handshake messages from a client, it is missing assurances on the client state:

- The client is not authenticated, unless the server has chosen to use a
pre-shared key and validated the client's pre-shared key binder; see
Section 4.2.11 of {{!TLS13}}.
- The client has not demonstrated liveness.
- Any received 0-RTT data that the server responds to might be due to a replay
attack.

Therefore, the server's use of 1-RTT keys is limited before the handshake is
complete.  A server MUST NOT process data from incoming 1-RTT
protected packets before the TLS handshake is complete.  Because
sending acknowledgments indicates that all frames in a packet have been

> processed, this means that a server cannot send acknowledgments for 1-RTT

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
processed, a server cannot send acknowledgments for 1-RTT
```

Author: Fixed

to decrypt 1-RTT packets from the server, whereas a server will be able to
decrypt 1-RTT packets from the client.

Even though 1-RTT keys are available to a server after receiving the first

> handshake messages from a client, it is missing assurances on the state of the

Author: Fixed

> client:

Author: Fixed

- The client is not authenticated, unless the server has chosen to use a
pre-shared key and validated the client's pre-shared key binder; see
Section 4.2.11 of {{!TLS13}}.

> - The client has not demonstrated liveness.

Reviewer 4: +1

> - The client has not demonstrated liveness.

Author: Fixed

- Any received 0-RTT data that the server responds to might be due to a replay
attack.

Therefore, the server's use of 1-RTT keys is limited before the handshake is
complete.  A server MUST NOT process data from incoming 1-RTT
protected packets before the TLS handshake is complete.  Because
sending acknowledgments indicates that all frames in a packet have been
processed, this means that a server cannot send acknowledgments for 1-RTT
packets until the TLS handshake is complete.  Received packets protected with
1-RTT keys MAY be stored and later decrypted and used once the handshake is
complete.

The requirement for the server to wait for the client Finished message creates
a dependency on that message being delivered.  A client can avoid the
potential for head-of-line blocking that this implies by sending its 1-RTT
packets coalesced with a handshake packet containing a copy of the CRYPTO frame
that carries the Finished message, until one of the handshake packets is
acknowledged.  This enables immediate server processing for those packets.

> 

Reviewer 2: This text is a bit overlapping with previous section recommending sending a PING frame.

Reviewer: The other suggests PING (or ack-eliciting) to induce an ACK.  This is about sending Handshake packets multiple times in order to ensure that they get through in a timely fashion.  So these aren't really the same.

Author: Agree with @martinthomson, this is about leveraging coalesced packets to avoid head of line blocking, not about trying to elicit ACKs at 1-RTT

to decrypt 1-RTT packets from the server, whereas a server will be able to
decrypt 1-RTT packets from the client.

Even though 1-RTT keys are available to a server after receiving the first
handshake messages from a client, it is missing assurances on the state of the
client:

> - The client is not authenticated (unless the server has chosen to use a

Reviewer: Two open parentheses, one close in this point.  I think that you can replace the first with a comma.

Author: Fixed

> pre-shared key and validated the client's pre-shared key binder (see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pre-shared key and validated the client's pre-shared key binder; see
```

Author: Fixed

> Section 4.2.11 of [TLS13]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Section 4.2.11 of {{!TLS13}}.
```

Author: Fixed

- The client has not demonstrated liveness.
- Any received 0-RTT data that the server responds to might be due to a replay
attack.

Therefore, the server's use of 1-RTT keys is limited before the handshake is
complete.  A server MUST NOT process data from incoming 1-RTT

> protected packets before the TLS handshake is complete.  Note that, since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
protected packets before the TLS handshake is complete.  Because
```

Author: Fixed

message as a connection error of type 0x10a, equivalent to a fatal TLS alert of
unexpected_message (see {{tls-errors}}).

An endpoint MUST NOT initiate the first key update until the handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}). An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent
key update until it has received an acknowledgment for a packet sent at the
current KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented by tracking the lowest packet
number sent with each KEY_PHASE, and the highest acknowledged packet number
in the 1-RTT space: once the latter is higher than or equal to the former,

> another key update can be initiated.

Reviewer 3: Suggest similar rewording to earlier

> Endpoints MAY limit the number of sets of keys they retain to two sets for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Endpoints MAY limit the number of keys they retain to two sets for
```

Author: Fixed

removing packet protection and one set for protecting packets.  Older keys
can be discarded.  Updating keys multiple times rapidly can cause
packets to be effectively lost if packets are significantly reordered.

> Therefore, an endpoint SHOULD NOT initiate a key update until three times the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, an endpoint SHOULD NOT initiate a key update for some time after it has last updated keys; the RECOMMENDED time period is three times the PTO value.
```

Author: Fixed

> PTO after it has last updated keys. This avoids valid reordered packets being

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This avoids valid reordered packets being
```

Author: Fixed

message as a connection error of type 0x10a, equivalent to a fatal TLS alert of
unexpected_message (see {{tls-errors}}).

An endpoint MUST NOT initiate the first key update until the handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}). An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent
key update until it has received an acknowledgment for a packet sent at the
current KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented by tracking the lowest packet
number sent with each KEY_PHASE, and the highest acknowledged packet number
in the 1-RTT space: once the latter is higher than or equal to the former,
another key update can be initiated.

Endpoints MAY limit the number of sets of keys they retain to two sets for
removing packet protection and one set for protecting packets.  Older keys
can be discarded.  Updating keys multiple times rapidly can cause

> packets to be effectively lost if packets are significantly delayed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
packets to be effectively lost if packets are significantly reordered.
```

Author: Fixed

message as a connection error of type 0x10a, equivalent to a fatal TLS alert of
unexpected_message (see {{tls-errors}}).

An endpoint MUST NOT initiate the first key update until the handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}). An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent
key update until it has received an acknowledgment for a packet sent at the
current KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented by tracking the lowest packet
number sent with each KEY_PHASE, and the highest acknowledged packet number
in the 1-RTT space: once the latter is higher than the former, another key
update can be initiated.

> 

Reviewer 2: why not higher than or **equal**?

Reviewer: Yes, it should allow equal.

Author: Fixed

message as a connection error of type 0x10a, equivalent to a fatal TLS alert of
unexpected_message (see {{tls-errors}}).

An endpoint MUST NOT initiate the first key update until the handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}). An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent
key update until it has received an acknowledgment for a packet sent at the

> current KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented by tracking the lowest packet

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
current KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented by recording the lowest packet
```

Author: Makes sense, fixed

Reviewer 3: Not showing up in this diff yet, did you push your changes?

> number sent with each KEY_PHASE, and the highest acknowledged packet number

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
number sent with each KEY_PHASE, and comparing it to the Largest Acknowledged packet number
```

Author: Resolving as editorial, this change can be made by the editors after this PR lands.

> in the 1-RTT space: once the latter is higher than or equal to the former,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in subsequently received ACK frames in the current KEY_PHASE; once the latter is higher than or equal to the former,
```

message as a connection error of type 0x10a, equivalent to a fatal TLS alert of
unexpected_message (see {{tls-errors}}).

An endpoint MUST NOT initiate the first key update until the handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}). An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent

> key update until it has received an ACK for a packet sent at the previous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
key update until it has received an acknowledgment for a packet sent at the current
```

Author: Fixed

KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented by tracking the lowest packet number sent

> with the previous KEY_PHASE, and the highest value of the Largest Acknowledged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with each KEY_PHASE, and the highest value of the Largest Acknowledged
```

Author: Fixed

> field in any received 1-RTT ACK frame: once the latter is higher than the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packet for the packet number space: once the latter is higher than the
```

Author: Fixed

former, another key update can be initiated.

> Endpoints only need to maintain the two latest sets of packet protection keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Endpoints are required to maintain at most two latest sets of packet protection keys
for removing packet protection and one set of keys for protecting packets.  Older
keys MAY be discarded.  Updating keys multiple times rapidly can cause
```

Author: I'm not sure this is correct. An endpoint can maintain more than 2 sets of keys if it so chooses.

Reviewer: Ahh, my bad.  I added the wrong implication.

```suggestion
Endpoints MAY limit the number of sets of keys they retain to two sets
for removing packet protection and one set for protecting packets.  Older
keys can be discarded.  Updating keys multiple times rapidly can cause
```

Author: Fixed

> and MAY discard older keys.  Updating keys multiple times rapidly can cause

Reviewer: I really want multi-line suggestions...
```suggestion
```

Author: Fixed

packets to be effectively lost if packets are significantly delayed.
Therefore, an endpoint SHOULD NOT initiate a key update until three times the
PTO after it has last updated keys. This avoids valid reordered packets being

> dropped by the peer because the peer could have discarded older keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dropped by the peer as a result of the peer discarding older keys.
```

Author: Fixed
